
====== Object Attributes ======


     All effective combat methods require equipment, and all benefit greatly
from various qualities that your equipped items may possess.  Defense is
similarly equipment-dependent.
     Attacks can also benefit or be hindered depending on the terrain in which 
the player or creature is standing.



--- Ordinary Attributes ---

Example 1:  A Battle Axe (2d8) (+6,+4)

Damage dice:
     The weapon above rolls two eight-sided dice in battle, for an average base
damage of: 2 * (8 + 1) / 2  =>  2 * 9 / 2  =>  9.

Bonus to hit:
     The weapon above has a bonus to hit of 6.  This bonus improves your chance
to hit monsters.  Apart from rare gloves, armours seldom have bonuses to combat.
Some have small penalties (see below).

Bonus to damage:
     The weapon above gets a bonus to damage of 4, and so does 2d8 + 4 points of
damage on most hits.  Apart from rare gloves, armours seldom have bonuses to
Deadliness.


Example 2:  A Hard Leather Armour (-1) [6,+5]

Base Armour Class (AC):
     This armour has a base AC of 6.  All armours have a base armour class; very
few weapons do.

Bonus to Armour Class:
     This armour has a bonus to AC of 5, which gives it a total protective value
of 11.  Armour of unusually good quality or that is magical also increases your
bonus to armour class.  Only rare weapons do the same.


Example 3:  A Mace (Holy Avenger) (2d4) (+7,+5) [+3] (+1)

     This weapon is a Holy Avenger (one of the more powerful ego-items).  It
rolls 2 four-sided dice when attacking and has +7 to hit and +5 to damage.  It
increases your AC by 3, and increases a numerical attribute (Wisdom, in this
case) by 1.


--- Adjustments to Vital statistics and Abilities ---

Stat Bonuses:
     Any kind of wearable item may affect one or more stats.  See the section on
your character to find out more about what altering a stat does.

Sustain Stats:
     Any kind of wearable item may sustain one or more stats.  This ensures that
the attacks of your foes never lower that stat.

Stealth:
     Certain cloaks, boots, and (more rarely) other items lessen the amount of
noise you make when moving around the dungeon.  This is very handy for avoiding
fights and getting in the first hit, which causes extra damage on a sleeping
monster in NPPMoria.  If the player is flying, their stealth is also increased.

Searching:
     Some rings, headgear, and various other items improve your chances to
reveal secret doors and find traps before they find you.  Bonuses to searching
improve both automatic and manual searching.

Infravision:
     Some headgear and (more rarely) other items increase the range at which you
can see warm-blooded creatures, even those that would otherwise be invisible.

Tunneling:
     Some gloves and weapons allow you to dig through rock more effectively.
All special digging tools have a bonus to tunneling.

Speed:
     Boots, rings, and weapons that hasten you are rare and powerful, for a fast
player can perform several actions in the time it used to take to do just one.
Players moving at speed -1 is half as fast as normal, at +1 are twice as fast
as normal, and at +2 are four times as fast as normal.  The maximum 
speed is +3.


--- Weapon Attributes ---

Damage multipliers  (only the best applies):
     Slay Evil      :  x2 against evil
     Slay Animal    :  x2 against animals
     Slay Undead    :  x3 against undead
     Slay Dragon    :  x4 against dragons

     Brand Acid     :  x2 against everything susceptible to acid
     Brand Fire     :  x2 against everything susceptible to fire
     Brand Cold     :  x2 against everything susceptible to cold
     Brand Pois     :  x2 against everything susceptible to poison


--- Resistances ---

     Resistances from equipment cannot be combined; you either have it or you
don't.  You can, however, temporarily oppose the elements and poison for an
additional 2/3rds reduction in damage.
     Resistances and oppositions also help reduce the amount of damage
elemental attacks do to items in your backpack.

Resist Acid:
     You take one-thirds damage from acid.

Resist Electricity:
     You take one-thirds damage from electricity.

Resist Cold:
     You take one thirds damage from cold.

Resist Fire:
     You take one-thirds damage from fire.

Ignore acid, electricity, fire, and cold:
     Some objects cannot be damaged or destroyed by elemental attacks.


--- Survival Attributes ---

Resist Blindness:
     Protects you from being blinded.


--- Character Qualities ---

Slow Digestion:
     Reduces your need to consume food.

Feather Fall:
     Renders pit traps and trap doors harmless.

Light:
     Some weapons and helms shine with inner light.  Each such object increases
your illumination radius by one.

Regeneration:
     Players who regenerate recover hitpoints and mana twice as quickly as
normal.  They also need to eat more.

Telepathy (ESP):
     It is not easy to acquire this, but players who do can see intelligent
monsters nearby.  Mindless monsters never appear, and semi-intelligent monsters
only appear occasionally.

See Invisible:
     Allows you to see and target monsters invisible to ordinary sight.

Free Action:
     Protects you from paralyzation and most slowing attacks.  Because
paralyzation can instantly kill you, keep an eye out for this important survival
aid.

Hold Life:
     Offers a high degree of protection from attacks (but not items) that reduce
experience.


--- Curses and other Nastiness ---

Random Teleportation:
     Some foul rings, amulets, and boots randomly take control of your movement
and whisk you around the dungeon.

Aggravate:
     Aggravation effectively reduces your stealth to nil, immediately waking up
all monsters nearby.  Some rings and amulets possess curses that aggravate, and
some weapons and armours are so powerful that no creature can ignore them.

Drain Exp:
     Objects that drain experience are perilous, because they slowly but surely
erase your accumulated memories.  Of course, you can keep killing monsters to
replace the experience which you lose.

Light (Normal) Curse:
     Many objects have light curses.  If you should wear or wield one, read a
scroll of remove curse.

