
====== Races ======

     There are eight different races that you may choose among, representing
most of the speaking peoples found in Tolkien's books, plus Gnomes and Kobolds.
Races differ in vital statistics, and tend to be better at some abilities than
at others.
     Good races for new players are Elves and Dwarves (good abilities).

***** <Human>
Human:
     A flexible and adaptive race, humans are found all over Middle-Earth, from
desert Harad to icy Horodwaith.  They have no special adjustments to stats, and
no special strengths or weaknesses.  This, combined with their solid hitpoints,
makes them flexible but not powerful adventurers.  They probably get the best
prices in stores, on average.  Humans may choose any class.

***** <Half-Elf>
Half-Elf:
     The descendants of Elves and Humans, Half-elves are more intelligent and
dexterous than humans, and are slightly better at many abilities, but are not so
strong, tough, or good at melee.  Half-elves sustain dexterity inherently, and
have some infravision.

***** <Elf>
Elf:
     Known as the Elder Race, and as the First-Born, Elves are famed for their
knowledge and craftsmanship.  They are somewhat weaker, less wise, and less
robust than humans, but have superior intelligence and strong magical abilities.
They are fond of bows, somewhat weak in melee, and have some infravision.  They
sustain dexterity and resist light inherently.  

***** <Halfling>
Hobbit:
     Hobbits are shy, retiring folk with enough good sense to share.  
Although they are weak, have perilously few hitpoints, and are very poor at melee, 
all of their other abilities are extraordinary.  Hobbits are highly intelligent, 
dexterous, and hardy, have innate infravision, and resist attacks on 
their life force.  

***** <Gnome>
Gnome:
     Gnomes are the pudgy pranksters of the dungeon; if they can kill something
in a humorous way, so much the better.  They may be small and ugly, but can
outbargain and outwit just about anyone.  They are among the frailer races, and
not powerful in combat, but have solid basic abilities, are highly intelligent
and dexterous, have innate infravision, and -- most importantly -- are immune to
paralyzation.

***** <Dwarf>
Dwarf:
     Dwarves are the headstrong miners and fighters of legend.  They are strong,
wise, tough, and have pretty good basic skills; although not very good at
casting spells, they make excellent priests.  Dwarves are quite good at melee
combat, have innate infravision, and -- a major advantage -- can never be
blinded.  They do have one big drawback, though:  Dwarves are loudmouthed and
proud, singing in loud voices, arguing with themselves for no good reason,
screaming out challenges at imagined foes.  In other words, dwarves have a
miserable stealth.

***** <Half-Orc>
Half-Orc:
     The bastard offspring of humans and orcs, half-orcs are ugly, strong, and
have very bad attitudes.  Their magic is a little suspect, as are most of their
skills, but they know how to fight and can take as much damage as they dish out.
Most other races dislike them and so they have a hard time in stores.  Half-orcs
have innate infravision and, like orcs themselves, resist darkness and its
effects.

***** <Half-Troll>
Half-Troll:
     Half-trolls are built like blocks of granite; no other race can match their
strength or recover hitpoints as quickly.  Their hand-to-hand combat prowess is
fearsome and they are amazingly tough.  Unfortunately, they do poorly at almost
everything else, are very noisy, need to eat a lot, and have a hard time in
stores.  Half-trolls will be bad at anything that requires heavy thinking.  They
have innate infravision and always have their strength sustained.  


====== Classes ======

     Your choice of class makes all the difference to how the game plays.  They
vary greatly in toughness, combat and magic power, and ability to notice,
detect, and avoid things.  Some suggested classes for new players are warriors
and paladins.

***** <Warrior>
Warrior:
     A hack-and-slash character who solves most of his problems by cutting them
to pieces.  He is unchallengeable with melee weapons, and is also good with all
missile launchers.  He becomes resistant to fear at level 30, and gets an extra
attack at level 26.  Although a warrior gets a lot of hitpoints, he is 
poor at the dungeon survival skills, vulnerable to magic, and suffers greatly 
from his ignorance of spells and many magical devices.  He gets fast, detailed 
feelings on weapons and armour (pseudo-ID).

***** <Mage>
Mage:
     A Mage must live by his wits.  He cannot hope to simply hack his way
through the dungeon, and so must therefore use his magic to defeat, deceive,
baffle, and escape.  A mage excels in the use of magical devices, and finds them
very handy when his mana runs low.  He has excellent magical defences, but
dangerously poor physical ones.  He has almost no chance of sensing wargear.
There is no rule that says a mage cannot become a good fighter, but spells are
his true realm.  Intelligence is his spell stat.

***** <Priest>
Priest:
     Covenanted with a mighty and generous god.  He explores the dungeon only to
cleanse the evil that lurks within, and if treasure just happens to fall into
his pack, well, so much more to the glory of the Church!  A Priest is familiar
with magical devices, preferring to call them "Instruments of God", but is not
as good as a mage in their use.  A priest can be a decent fighter, especially
when sanctified, but only with blunt or blessed weapons.  Unblessed edged
weapons (swords and polearms) violate the Church's strictures about shedding
blood, and wielding one will hurt his ability to pray successfully.  A Priest
has fast but weak pseudo-ID.  Wisdom is his prayer stat.

***** <Rogue>
Rogue:
     A Rogue is a character that prefers to live by his cunning, but is capable
of fighting his way out of a tight spot.  He is a master of traps and locks, no
device being impossible for him to overcome, and his stealth often lets him
choose his fights.  A rogue's perception is higher than that of any other class,
and ofttimes he will notice a trap or secret door without having to search.
Rogues can also learn a few spells, but not the powerful offensive magic mages
wield.  A rogue has moderately fast, detailed pseudo-ID.  Intelligence is his
spell stat.  The 'P' command allows a rogue to attempt to steal from 
monsters, and the 'O' command can set traps for unsuspecting monsters.  
As the brigand gains levels, he can create an increasing variety of traps by 
using the 'O' command on an existing monster trap.  He is exceptionally gifted 
with a sling, and gets an extra shot with a sling when he reaches level 26.

***** <Ranger>
Ranger:
     The greatest of bowsmen, capable of eventually firing a bow twice as 
fast than most.  He can also hold his own in melee, and has some useful
spells to aid him in need; rangers have many talents.  His dungeon survival
skills are better than average.  A ranger has average-speed, weak pseudo-ID.
Intelligence is his spell stat.  He gets an extra show with a bow at level
26.



====== Modifier Tables ======

Vital statistics:

                  STR  INT  WIS  DEX  CON  CHR  HD (base)   XP/level  Infra
      Human        0    0    0    0    0    0      10          +0%    None
      Half-Elf     1   +1    0   +1   -1   +1       9         +10%   20 feet
      Elf         -1   +2   +1   +1   -2   +1       8         +20%   30 feet
      Halfling    -2   +2   +1   +3   +1   +1       7         +10%   40 feet
      Gnome       -1   +2    0   +2   +1   -2       8         +25%   40 feet
      Dwarf       +2   -3   +1   -2   +2   -3      11         +20%   50 feet
      Half-Orc    +2   -1    0    0   +1   -4      10         +10%   30 feet
      Half-Troll  +4   -4   -2   -4   +3   -6      12         +20%   30 feet
  
                  STR  INT  WIS  DEX  CON  CHR  HD (bonus)  XP/level
      Warrior     +5   -2   -2   +2   +2   -1       9          +0%
      Mage        -5   +3    0   +1   -2   +1       0         +30%
      Priest      -3   -3   +3   -1    0   +2       2         +20%
      Rogue       +2   +1   -2   +3   +1   -1       6          +0%
      Ranger      +2   +2    0   +1   +1   +1       4         +40%
      Paladin     +3   -3   +1    0   +2   +2       6         +35%

     To get the total hit dice and experience modifier, add the race and class
numbers together.  For example:  A Dwarven Priest has a hit die of 11 + 2 = 13,
so will get 1d13 extra hit points per level before constitution bonuses.  He has
an experience modifier of 20% + 20% = 40%, so will take 40% more experience to
advance than a human warrior.


Abilities:

             Disarm  Device   Save  Stealth  Search  Percep   Fight   Bows 
  Human         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0
  Half-Elf      2       3       3       1       6      -1      -1      5
  Elf           5       6       6       1       8      -2      -5      15
  Halfling     15      18      18       4      12      -5     -10      20
  Gnome        10      12      12       3       6      -3      -8      12
  Dwarf         2       9       9      -1       7       0      15       0
  Half-Orc     -3      -3      -3      -1       0       7      12      -5
  Half-Troll   -5      -8      -8      -2      -1       5      20     -10

 
             Disarm  Device   Save  Stealth  Search  Percep   Fight   Bows 
 
  Warrior    25(+2)  18(+2)   18(+3)   1      14      38      70(+4)  55(+4)
  Mage       30(+3)  36(+4)   36(+3)   2      16      20      34(+2)  20(+2)
  Priest     25(+3)  30(+4)   30(+3)   2      16      32      48(+3)  35(+3)
  Rogue      45(+4)  32(+3)   30(+3)   5      32      16      60(+4)  66(+3)
  Ranger     30(+3)  32(+3)   30(+3)   3      24      24      56(+3)  72(+3)
  Paladin    20(+3)  24(+2)   24(+3)   1      12      38      68(+3)  40(+3)

     Value for classes are starting ability - final ability.  Note that prayers
and spells can improve many of these skills dramatically.
     Melee blows:  All classes can get up to 4 blows.  Warriors get an additional
blow at level 26, for a max of 5 blows.

